The Russian Community in particular has been quite adamant
that I do a series on a T-34.
Well, where better to visit a T-34 than to come to Russia.
We’re in a little town Padikovo a tad west of Moscow,
to have a look at their T-34/85.
It’s the middle of June, it’s absolutely freezing,
but my Russian Camera crew says it’s kind of warm
so we’re going to do this anyway.
The T-34 was doing quite well,
but it needed a little bit of an upgrade to the gun.
The 76mm was starting to show its age,
so by August of 43, they started to investigating
as to whether or not you could but an 85mm into it.
Well the answer was Yes you could,
but you needed to increase the turret ring diameter to about 1600 millimeters,
quite an increase over the 1420 of the earlier T-34.
This did allow one significant advantage though,
and that was you could now put a wider turret with a three man crew.
This fixed a significant failing of the older T-34,
which was a little bit cramped,
and the two man crew were overworked and inefficient.
We’re going to look at the T-34 in the usual manner
you are now familiar with.
We’re going to start at the front and work our way around,
look at the engine, and then hop inside.
Maybe even take it for a spin.
We’ll see.
The vehicle’s front hull, 45mm of armor,
sloped at 60 degrees, top and bottom.
This is sort of a mid production vehicle,
it has this small narrow rail in front.
Earlier ones had a larger radius and later ones
they dispensed with it entirely and just went
with a two piece direct weld.
If you look at the details of the far left
and right wings are two armored plugs.
This is for the track tension system.
Now there is some misconception that
because T-34 had slack unsupported track
you didn’t need to tension it.
Well this is absolutely wrong.
If you don’t keep an unsupported track
at the correct level of tension
you will walk the track off.
So in order to tension the track
what you do is you first release a lock
which is on the inside of the tank,
right in the front corners in the bow.
You then take a tool, insert that into here,
and then you crank a worm drive,
which will then move the idler wheel forwards or backwards.
When you’re done you lock the idler wheel back into position,
put your plug back in the top, and away you go.
Other features on the front, two tow hooks, spare track,
and of course a machine gun, a horn and a headlight are on the left.
If you want to know a little bit more on the specifications of the tank,
well I’ve got Yuri Pasholok here off the screen teaching me the finer points of T-34-ology,
and one of the things he points out is the serial number is actually coded.
The first character, in this case a four,
is the year of manufacture; 1944.
The next two characters are the month: 12, December.
Lastly, ‘117’ means it was the 177th tank to come off the line
that month in Nizhny Tagil.
Now, it doesn’t say Nizhny Tagil on this,
but there are a couple of features around the tank
which indicate that was the plant of manufacture.
Every single manufacturing plant had its own little idiosyncrasies
which it implemented into the tank.
So a T-34 built in one plant was not necessarily identical
with a T-34 built in another plant.
They were just fit to the same general design and specifications.
External Fuel Tanks, 90 Liters, you would have one of course on each side.
Now later on in production you were able to put on four of them.
These were not part of the fuel system;
they were simply extra fuel that you could
then pump yourself into the fuel tanks.
Moving a bit further forward,
this is an access cover for some of the oil,
there is one on the far side as well.
Now, common to everything else on this tank, it is bolted down.
You can’t do any maintenance without tools.
So, undo this bolts, lift this up out of the way, undo more bolts,
you can finally access your lubricants.
Moving forward, this is a post war addition so ignore it.
Keep moving, of course you have your hand rails for the tank riders,
firing port for personal weapons, the horn, headlight,
and finally point to note is the welding.
Now if you compare the weld with that on earlier T-34s,
especially the early war production ones,
you’ll see this is far, far better.
About part way through the war,
a Soviet Engineer figured out the concept of submerged Arc Welding,
which is far more efficient, far faster, far less man hours.
The welds that it produced were so strong,
that in testing they were stronger than the armor it was welding together.
So, improvement there.
Finally on the side, an access point here for one of the suspension units.
There’s another one you can see here aft of the turret.
But also you can see that the turret is on top of it.
So in order to do any maintenance,
you got to pull the turret off,
which is mildly inconvenient.
Finally, fuel filler point, and as ever,
you’ve got to open up the bolts to gas up the tank.
Now, T-34 is not the most refined tank in the world.
A perfect example of this is found in the running gear.
Now most other tanks you’re going to look at,
they’re going to have some sort of mechanism
to stop the track from falling apart.
There is maybe a clip, or a bolt, if you’ve got a double pin track,
like an American system for example,
you’ve got end connectors.
This, as you can see, there’s absolutely nothing
which stops the track pin from working its way out of the track.
The only thing that keeps the track together in the end, however, is this ramp.
Which if the track pin was worked its way out too far,
when it comes forward and hits this ramp it just gets whacked back into place.
A somewhat crude technique,
however, given how long they expected the tank
was going to survive in battle anyway,
it really didn’t matter.
This wasn’t supposed to last for years and years,
it was supposed to last one or two battles,
maybe three battles, and chances were by then that your tank was dead
or the track was dead, it didn’t matter.
The links themselves, 72 per side cast of Hadfield Steel.
There were two types of links on each track; 36 of each.
One will have the center guide, and the other will have a hole.
This hole is used for ice grousers.
Basically once every six or so
link you’re going to put an ice grouser in here.
It gives you a little more traction on particularly loose or slippery surfaces.
To propel the tank forward, again this is a bit like the BT we saw before,
most tanks are going to have a sprocket wheel.
Not so in the case of T-34 and its derivatives.
There are rollers in the drive wheel,
each of which will mesh with the center guide,
and this will propel the tank forward.
Now the advantage of this, is that there is no friction.
You’re talking about rollers meshing with the teeth.
The downside though of course,
all of your tractive effort going through a single piece of metal,
every other link, and when you start talking about 40 ton tanks,
you start getting to a weak point.
So at that point, it was about as far as you went,
and later tanks you would see more of a conventional sprocket wheel.
Moving right back right quick to the main road wheels,
830mm each one, five pairs per side on the Christie Suspension.
These particular road wheels are unique to the Nizhny Tagil Factory.
Other road wheels for T-34s you see, some are solid, some are spoked,
but by a combination of very simple features you can tell where a tank was built,
and this is one of the features that Yuri was telling me “Ah ha! Nizhny Tagil tank!”
Look around to the back of the tank,
we have more armor plate at 45mm thick also well sloped.
And you’re starting to come along some of the inefficiency
if the back of the tank is as well armored
as the front the tank almost,
you wonder if that’s the most effective use of the weight.
However, that said, if you were to be shot at from the rear,
better to have it than not.
Dominated by a large access port,
undo these bolts and you can open this up,
and you can access the starter motor,
the transmission, and the steering clutches.
Exhaust ports on each side, and the entire plate can be unbolted,
as you can see it’s hinged, and you can bring it forward.
The 67 and a half liter tanks, I mentioned earlier.
It was more often than not that three of the four external tanks would be filled
with fuel and the fourth one would have oil in it.
Outside of that, underneath, you have the tow hooks as you would expect.
These little pipes up here are for smoke dischargers,
and you can barely see at the top here a convoy light;
small little red bulb.
So this particular tank does have a third 90 liter tank on the right hand side.
Now the internal fuel capacity was about 680 liters.
If you add that to the external tanks it would be expected that,
again diesel engine, this tank will go about 300 kilometers,
which is actually pretty reasonable.
Under the turret we have another access port for a suspension unit.
And I’m told another unique Nizhny Tagil feature is
this sort of flat triangle on the side of the turret,
which apparently most other T-34/85s did not have.
So after spinning the turret, we can open up the back hatch.
Of course it requires the use of a tool,
like everything else on this tank does.
However it’s actually pretty simple,
it’s just a case of lever it up and pull it back.
This reveals to us the V-2-34.
It is a V-12 Diesel cranks out about 500 horsepower.
The cooling system is about the only thing you can actually access under here.
The filler cap is right in the center.
There are radiators on each side of the engine,
under the louvers here.
The capacity of the cooling system is 75 liters.
Not much else to be seen from the top here,
we’re going to close this up and then open up the transmission compartment.
The Transmission Compartment is held in place,
there are some relatively quick release springs here,
which have already conveniently been half way opened up.
Ah ha! And now a nice light…Oh come off
oh, it helps if you’re not standing on it.
There we go, much better.
Underneath, you can see these cooling louvers,
they are on a swivel shutter.
You can close these up if you need more protection
from airburst or aircraft attack.
Underneath you can see a large flywheel,
which of course transmits the power back to the transmission.
If you look down at the very far bottom,
you can see the control linkages for the clutches and brakes,
there’s one on each side, obviously for steering.
You can also see the two multi-cyclone air filters.
Unfortunately, if you’ve got to change these air filters out
you have to do it usually every 25 hours.
You have to pull out these armored louvers first.
That will then allow you to access the air filters.
It’s not the end of the world because
there’s only a couple of bolts in each side,
but it’s still a nuisance
that you don’t really want to deal with all that much.
The maintenance on this is a little bit intense,
if after only 10 hours of use you’re supposed to check the clutch plate
and make sure it goes six to seven millimeters.
If you’re lucky enough to get your engine going 25 hours,
you’ve got to clean out your air filters.
If your tank lasts for 50 hours of travel,
or a thousand kilometers,
then things really start getting nasty.
You have to start disassembling the suspension to get to get at them.
However, if you’re lucky,
your tank won’t last that long.
You won’t have to do the maintenance;
just go and get another tank.
There’s a lot of ways of almost falling off this tank by the way.
It’s not quite as bad as the Matilda,
but it’s pretty nasty.
And thus ends Part One.
So Part two of course, Turret and inside.